CHAPTER 0

A proposition is a statement to which it is possible to assign a truth value.

If a proposition is true, a proof of the proposition is a logically valid argument demonstrating that it is true.

Natural numbers, integers, rational and irrational numbers, real numbers and complex numbers.

Base b representation of natural numbers (very brief introduction in chapter 0, more details later).

For integers a and b, we say that a divides b if and only if there is an integer c such that b = ac.

Introduction to polynomials.


CHAPTER 1

A propositional variable is a symbol that represents a proposition. Propositional variables may be assigned truth values.

Logical operators "and", "or", "if", "if and only if" and "not", and their conditions for truth.

A propositional formula is an expression that is either a propositional variable, or is built up from propositional variables using logical operators.

Two propositional formulae are logically equivalent if and only if their truth values are the same under any assignment of truth values to their constituent propositional variables.
In order to prove that propositional formulae are logically equivalent, it suffices to show that they have identical columns in a truth table. 

Some common equivalent propositional formulae:

a and b is equivalent with b and a
a or b is equivalent with b or a

((a or b) or c) is equivalent with (a or (b or c))
((a and b) and c) is equivalent with (a and (b and c))

((a and b) or c) is equivalent with ((a or c) and (b or c))  <- distributivity
((a or b) and c) is equivalent with ((a and c) or (b and c)) <- distributivity

not (a or b) is equivalent with ((not a) and (not b)) <- DeMorgan's Laws
not (a and b) is equivalent with ((not a) or (not b)) <- DeMorgan's Laws

(a implies b) is equivalent with ((not b) implies (not a)) <- contrapositive

not (a implies b) is equivalent with (a and (not b)) <- negating implication

Note that the converse of (a implies b), namely (b implies a), is NOT equivalent with (a implies b).

A tautology is a propositional formula which is true for every true assignment of its propositional variable.
A contradiction is a propositional formula which is false for every true assignment of its propositional variable.


Examples of elementary direct proofs of disjunctions and conjunctions.

Examples of proof by contrapositive.

Examples of proof of "there exists x in X p(x)" by displaying an element x in X such that p(x) is true.

Examples of proof by contradiction. One assumes that the given statement is false and derives (a and (not a)) or 
some other contradiction. If the statement is "a implies b", then one assumes "a and (not b)" and typically
derives b, providing the contradiction (b and (not b)).


A predicate is a symbol p together with a specified list of free variables x1,x2,...,xn (where n is a positive integer) and,
for each free variable xi, a specification of a set Xi called the domain of discourse (or range) of xi. 

The two main quantifiers used throughout mathematics are the universal quantifier "exists" and the existential quantifier "forall". 

A logical formula is an expression that is built from predicates using logical operators and quantifiers; 
it may have both free (unquantified) and bound (quantified) variables. 

Logical formulae are negated by replacing "forall" with "exists", replacing "exists" with "forall", and negating the predicate.

Another important quantifier is "exists unique".  "There exists a unique x in X  p(x)" is defined as
"(there exists x in X  p(x)) and [for all x, y in X ((p(x) and p(y)) implies x=y)]"

The negation of "There exists a unique x in X  p(x)" is thus
"(for all x in X (not p(x))) or (there exist x, y in X [(x not equal to y) and (p(x) and p(y))]".


CHAPTER 2

A set is a collection of (distinct, unordered) elements from a specified universe of discourse. 
The collection of everything in the universe of discourse is called the universal set, denoted by U.

"element of", "subset of", "proper subset of", set builder notation, interval notation for real numbers.

The empty set

One shows that sets A and B are equal by either of following

1) Show that A is a subset of B and then show that B is a subset of A.
2) Show that for every x in U, x is in A if and only if x is in B.

Intersection, Union, A \ B, Complement, Cartesian Product, Power Set


CHAPTER 3

A function f from a set X to a set Y is a specification of elements f(x) in Y for x in X, such that for all x in X, there is a unique y in Y, y = f(x).
We call X the domain of f and we call Y the codomain of f.

For a sqecification to "well define" a function f, it must satisfy totality (be computable for each x in X), existence (the computed objects must be always be in Y),
and uniqueness (there computation must result in one and only one element of Y).

If U is a subset of X, then f[U] = {y in Y: there is x in U such that f(x)=y}. This is called the image of U under f.

If V is a subset of Y, then f^{-1}[V] = {x in X: f(x) is in V}. This is called the preimage of V under f.

f is an injection if and only if for all x1, x2 in X, (f(x1)=f(x2) implies x1=x2).
f is a surjection if and only if for all y in Y, there is x in X such that f(x)=y.
f is a bijection if and only if f is a surjection and f is an injection.


If f:X->Y and g:Y->Z, then we define "g composed with f" from X to Z by specifying that (g composed with f)(x) = g(f(x)) for every x in X.
Function composition is associative, but not commutative.

If f:X->Y and g:Y->X, then g is a left inverse of f and f is a right inverse of g if and only if g(f(x))=x for every x in X.

Theorem: If X is not the emptyset and f:X->Y and g:Y->X, then

1) f has a right inverse if and only if f is a surjection
2) f has a left inverse if and only if f is an injection


